VARANASI: It is perhaps the most disturbing moment for a person when he comes to know that he is HIV positive. And, Varanasi is supposed to be one of the main centres of HIV infected persons due to its migrant population."In Varanasi district alone, there are over 1,000 persons infected with HIV and the number of such people goes above 11,000 in eastern parts of UP," informed secretary, Banaras Network of Positive People Living with HIV/AIDS Society (commonly known as BNP+), Sunil Seth. The network is spread over 30 districts of the state with active members to motivate and help HIV persons to lead a purposeful life.However, according to WHO report, over 34 million people are living with HIV and AIDS across the world. India alone, with 2.3 million cases of HIV, has the third highest number of HIV affected persons in the world.According to the National AIDS Control Organisation (NACO), around 3,22,521 persons were taking treatment for AIDS by April 2010. And, to give a new lease of life to such persons, the anti-retroviral therapy (ART) centre at the Banaras Hindu University (BHU) is playing a remarkable role. "So far, 11,321 HIV patients have been registered with the ART Centre, Institute of Medical Sciences, BHU," said Dr Jaya of the centre. "Around 4,500 patients are living on therapy and get regular medicines," she added. The ART at BHU is one of the 10 centres of excellence in HIV care in the country and the only in Uttar Pradesh, where the facility of second line drugs is available. It monitors the activity of 11 ART centres in Bihar, UP and Madhya Pradesh. It is also a training and research centre.According to the doctor, those patients registered in ART centre of BHU, who have completed six month's therapy and are stable and have increasing CD4 count, can be referred to Link ART centres affiliated to BHU ART centre established in the neighbouring districts of Ballia, Ghazipur, Jaunpur, Mau, Sonebhadra, Bhadohi, Chandauli and Azamgarh. They are basically drug distribution centres. Beside the Integrated Counselling and Testing Centre (ICTC) and Prevention of Parent to Child Transmission (PPTCT) centre, Shiv Prasad Gupta District Hospital Kabirchoura, Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Regional Hospital Pandeypur and Central Jail Hospital Sivpur are other centres where free HIV investigation is available under NACO supervision.The crux of the whole exercise is to protect precious human life. The doctor says if by mistake one deviates and acquires this disease, he should not lose courage. He should get investigated and should take proper medicine and advice from the health personnel. An early diagnosis of HIV status helps in preventing and significantly delaying morbid conditions associated with HIV/AIDS. If the HIV-infected person is irregular in time or quantity of the drugs, or he starts and stops the drugs abruptly, the treatment becomes ineffective. The HIV infected person can live a productive and healthy life if he takes care of his health, eating habits and lifestyle.Vital FactsWhat is HIV?Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) is a virus, which damages the body's immune system by destroying CD4+lymphocutes. This CD4 cells help us to fight against infections. Thus destruction of these cells by the virus leads to immune deficiency and susceptibility to different infections.How it spreadsHIV infection spreads through unsafe sexual contact, transfusion of infected blood or blood products, sharing needles to inject drugs and from mother to child during childbirth and breast-feeding. However, HIV does not spread through mosquito bites, tear, saliva, urine, by embracing, casual kissing, hand shaking, working together, taking bath or swimming together with HIV infected person.In India, it is migrant population, truck drivers, community sex workers and IV drug abusers who are affected. They, in turn, spread the disease to their wives, children and clients.Clinical presentationWithin a few weeks of being infected, some people get fever, headache, sore muscles and joints, stomach ache, swollen lymph glands or a skin rash for one or two weeks. Most people think it is flu. After the initial illness, patients can remain symptom free for many years (3-10 years), as the CD4 cell count decreases and the immunity decreases the patient first gets minor infection then the severity of infection increases. The last stage of HIV infection is when the CD4 decreases below 200 per micro litre is called AIDS when the patient may succumb to minor illness.How to get testedIf any person wants to get himself tested for HIV, he should go to the Integrated Counselling and Testing Centre (ICTC) which provides free testing and counselling. The ICTC centres are present in every district hospital and medical colleges. If a person tests positive, he is referred to the nearest anti-retroviral therapy (ART) centre.TreatmentOnce a person is infected with HIV virus, the virus can never be eliminated from the body. However, there are drugs available that can suppress the level of virus in the body. These drugs are available free of cost at all ART centres. Every HIV positive patient may not be started on treatment immediately. The treatment is started on the basis of CD4 count and stage of the disease. The treatment, if started, has to be continued lifelong. It is extremely important to adhere to the treatment so as to prevent failure of the drug regimen.Where to go for treatmentThe National AIDS Control Organisation (NACO) control programme in India through 35 HIV/AIDS Prevention and Control Societies and 269 ART centres throughout the country. The ART centre at Sir Sunder Lal (SSL) hospital of BHU provides free HIV testing, treatment, counselling, nutritional advice and AVR drugs to the registered patients.(Source: Centre of Excellence/ART Centre, BHU)