NASHIK: Reaching beyond individual sustenance and rehabilitation, people with the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) have come together to form a support group and have registered with the Charity Commissioner for the purpose.The organisations titled 'Network of People and Children Living with HIV (NPCLH)' have a seven member team; two men and five women. "Like any other organisation we are not limited to identify HIV patients and fighting for their health care issues with the government, but we also intend to strengthen the confidence among the patients to such an extent that they can lead a self-respecting life," said Yogita, the president of the organisation.The organisation, which started two years back, was only a given legal frame-work in October this year. "NGO - Yash Foundation - that receives grant from Mahindra and Mahindra have helped and guided for four years. We realized that the lives of PCLHs can be made beautiful with medication and support and we can lead a normal life and perform all activities that others do. Now it is time for us to take it forward," Yogita added.The HIV 'positive' people have already been visiting the antiretroviral therapy centres, interacting with other patients, fighting for fair treatment to the people admitted in civil hospital, tracing patients, counseling them and their relatives, providing meals for patients as well as their relatives during their stay in hospitals and providing legal aid. They are also rehabilitating people based on their qualifications and ability to work."Today we have more than 300 positive people. Women unwilling or unable to go out and work are given the works to stitch gloves, while some others are engaged in managing files in rehabilitation centre. But there is a large numbers of positive patients who have been employed in engineering, pharmaceuticals or even other companies as well," said Radhika, an office-bearer of the NPC.Yogita said that the organisation was planning to open a hostel for women and children primarily and even for men. There are several donors for the project, but, there is no land available yet.Ravindra Patil of the foundations said, "The concept of the support group is overwhelming and the foundation is ready to provide all the guidance necessary. However, now it has to ensure that it can sustain itself. The members are definitely capable of doing it."