Mumbai: On World Aids Day, the city has a reason to cheer. Figures available from the Mumbai Districts of AIDS Control Society (MDACS) show that the rate of new HIV infection is dropping. Mumbai, infamous as the HIV capital of India, has recorded lower scores for all groups — the general population as well as the high-risk population such as female sex workers.In 2002, 17% of the men who tested themselves at voluntary testing centres were positive for HIV. In 2009, till October, only 8.6% of those who got themselves tested were positive."There is no doubt that new HIV infection rate is falling,'' says Dr S S Kudalkar, chief of MDACS who took charge over 18 months ago. The numbers have also fallen for the most vulnerable population — pregnant women from the general population. From 1.83% in 2003, the percentage of pregnant women testing positive for HIV has fallen to 0.59% in 2009. In the same period, infection figures for women fell from 10.9% to 7.6%.According to Dr Kudalkar, "What is also enthusing to note is that we are able to counsel more and more people.'' While 26,022 people sought counselling in 2002, the number stands at 1,71,569 in 2009. In this period, MDACS has also ensured that the targetted intervention for high-risk groups such as sex workers and truckers is almost 100%.The dip in Mumbai rates is not surprising. The all-India figures too show the same trend. "The HIV numbers are coming down across the country, but that is no reason to relax the guard,'' warns Dinesh Trivedi, Union minister of state for health who was in Mumbai for an awareness event organised by the Heroes Project. At an all-India level, the prevalence rate for adult women is 0.29%; for males it is 0.43%.Across the world, the rate of new infection is dropping. The report released by the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV\AIDS (UNAIDS) for 2009 recently showed that global new HIV infection rates had fallen by 17% in the period between 2001 and 2008. What has brought about this healthy change?According to the UNAIDS, this is a correlation of the popularity of HIV-awareness drives. Dr Kudalkar puts it differently, "Until a few years back, there was no treatment for HIV. But the availability of treatment means people are coming out in larger numbers, getting tested and learning about the disease.''Dr J K Maniar, who was a member of the Jaslok Hospital team that treated India's first HIV positive patients three years ago, doesn't believe there is any reason to cheer. "These statistics are based on flawed models. One just has to go to small towns and villages to know how widespread HIV has become in these last 23 years.''He believes that for every two AIDS patients who dies in India daily, there are eight who are infected with the virus every minute. "There is a silent population that is not being registered with governmental agencies because of the stigma,'' says Dr Maniar.