NEW DELHI: A person whose spoken or written word(s) that may lead to hostility or hatred against an HIV patient could go to jail for two years. An AIDS patient cannot be denied employment or sacked except with a written assessment of an independent healthcare provider that the person poses a risk of transmission of virus to others at the workplace. These are some of the path-breaking provisions in a law drafted by the government that provides for stiff punishment for discrimination against those who are HIV-positive and for propagating hatred against the victims of the infection.The 'new deal' for a stigmatized group that is often condemned twice is in the final stage of approval with the Centre finalizing the long-pending HIV-AIDS (Prevention & Control) Bill that was caught in differences between ministries of law and health. It lays down inviolable rights for patients and stringent duties for individuals and institutions dealing with them. HIV test not must for getting jobs, proposes bill The proposed law states that testing for AIDS cannot be a pre-requisite for employment or for access to healthcare, education or public places. It would mean that HIV afflicted people refused entry to public places like hotels or restaurants or denied purchase or renting of house can move an ombudsman. They can also move courts against discrimination. Also, a person with HIV virus cannot be sacked or denied employment except with a written assessment of a qualified and independent healthcare provider that the afflicted person indeed poses risks of transmission. Any person below 18 years of age and a woman of any age will have the right to live in a shared property, as a safeguard against eviction due to stigma. The medical costs will be factored in during any maintenance settlements. This can help women in divorce cases. The law would put in place a National Authority in the form of a Department of AIDS Control (NACO), which will formulate guidelines and rules for protocols like treatment of HIV patients through Anti-Retroviral Therapy or rules for blood banks or diagnostic centres. An ombudsman in every state, as the forum to adjudicate violations under the law, would help the aggrieved to avoid time-consuming legal proceedings in civil courts. The law seeks to deter rampant victimization of HIV-positive persons. A key clause prescribes a jail term of three months to two years for any spoken or written word, or display of information or advertisement, which could expose HIV-positive persons to any form of hostility. This can also lead to a fine up to Rs one lakh. The inviolable right of an HIV person, as part of the first-ever codification of rights and duties, may help patients who face subtle or overt discrimination with no forum for grievance redressal. The law asserts no person can be forced to take an HIV test. For such a test, the authority would have to secure consent after due counseling on all pros and cons. Similarly, no HIV-positive person can be subjected to medical treatment without his consent - a decision which should be made after he has been informed about the risks and benefits of the treatment. A judicial order would be the only exception to force an AIDS test on a person apart from "screening purpose" in a blood bank.The HIV positive persons would finally enjoy guaranteed confidentiality. No person can be compelled to disclose his HIV status (except under a court directive). In a strict deterrent, the law states that if a person reveals the identity of an HIV-positive, as information that is passed on as part of legal proceedings, he could face a fine of up to Rs 1 lakh.To balance the threat of transmission with stringent non-disclosure law, a doctor can disclose his patient's HIV-positive status to his partner if he believes there is a risk of infection. However, he would have to guard against such disclosure about a woman if there is apprehension that it can lead to her being abandoned or facing violence.The ombudsman can impose an initial fine of Rs 10,000, and thereafter Rs 5,000 a day for non-compliance of orders.To ensure that non-discrimination clause of Act is followed at workplace, every institution with over 100 employees would have to appoint a senior officer to deal with violations of the law.