Harjeet is no different from the thousands of Punjab villagers who dream of a well-paying job in the Gulf. In 1995, he applied for a work visa, forking out Rs 20,000 to an agent in Mumbai. A mandatory medical check followed and all the doctor would tell him was that "something is wrong" with his blood test results. He offered however to help suppress information for a "commission" of Rs 2,000.The expenses cost Harjeet a loan but he managed to fly to Saudi Arabia. On arrival, he was subjected to another medical test. To his shock, he was soon after whisked away to an isolated cell and jailed there for a day. The next day he was taken to a court which ordered his deportation. Harjeet, it seems, had tested HIV-positive .Back in India, Harjeet found that his wife had walked out of the family home with their two children. He was packed off to a care centre and left alone to deal with his situation. Severely depressed, Harjeet began getting multiple seizures that left him partially paralysed . He eventually recovered with a lot of support from the care centre. Today, Harjeet works with people who are HIV-positive and his life story has been documented by the International Aids Society (IAS).Harjeet is not alone. Thousands of people across the world have been deported or denied entry into countries because they are HIV-positive . This is despite the fact that stigmatising HIV-positive individuals is contrary to effective public health programming.Official data shows that 66 countries, territories and areas deny entry, stay or residence to HIV-positive individuals: of these, 26 deport migrants who test positive, seven refuse permission to stay beyond a certain time bar and six deny entry even for very short-term stay."It is incomprehensible that HIV-related entry and residency restrictions still exist," says Kevin Moody, International Coordinator and CEO, Global Network of People Living with HIV. "These restrictions are in blatant violation of human rights, they stimulate stigma and discrimination and actually hurt the response to the HIV epidemic."India's health secretary, K Sujatha Rao, believes that irrational discriminatory laws should be lifted. "In India, we don't have any laws against residence or visit by HIV patient," she points out.Many of these restrictions, says the IAS, were imposed in the early days of the epidemic, when there was a great deal of ignorance, fear and prejudice surrounding the subject. At that time, many governments saw these laws as an attempt to "protect the public health" and avoid the potential costs of care.The situation has, however, changed dramatically. There is a lot of information available about the disease and its prevention and the antiretroviral treatment can extend the life span of those who are HIV positive. Dr Helene Gayle, chief advisor to US president Barack Obama on HIV/AIDS, points out that these restrictive laws are no longer justified by concerns about public health."Over 60 countries around the world have a variety of HIV-specific laws that restrict the entry, stay or residence of people living with HIV including Iraq, Saudi Arabia, Sudan, Qatar, Oman, Russia, Colombia , South Korea, Yemen and Armenia ," says Dr Gayle. According to IAS executive director Craig McClure, scientific evidence shows that travel restrictions against those who are HIV-infected make for ineffective prevention tools. "These laws are not consistent with current scientific knowledge, best practices in public health and humanitarian principles. They sustain a culture of exclusion, rights violations and marginalisation that impedes an effective response to the epidemic," says McClure.A WHO statement points out that such entry restrictions actually pressurise people into concealing their HIV infection from immigration authorities. They simply do not carry their HIV medicines on international trips. This could lead to drug-resistant HIV strains that are transmissible to other people. "Furthermore, because drug resistance allows HIV to replicate in the body more freely, people with higher viral loads are also more infectious," says the statement.In the Asia and the Pacific region, countries have different kinds of restrictive laws for the HIV-affected . Singapore has an outright ban on all HIV-positive non-nationals for entry and immigration.Brunei targets HIV-positive foreigners for deportation. Australia requires HIV testing for permanent visa applicants over the age of 15. South Korea announced changes to its entry and immigration policy on January 1, 2010, but clarifications on its amended laws are still unclear.Some countries ask applicants to indicate their HIV status, some seek confirmation of HIV-negative test results and others insist on testing as a part of a mandatory medical exam for those seeking work permits.Things are however changing. The US, China and Namibia recently lifted their decades old travel laws against HIV-positive people. Hopefully, others will follow suit,and soon.