NIZAMABAD: This doesn't bode well for the health of Nizamabad district. For, six persons are testing positive -- on an average -- for HIV every day. Little wonder, there has been an alarming rise in HIV-positive cases in the district in the last few months.Among those afflicted with HIV, a majority of them are gays and pregnant women. Sources said 180 HIV-positive cases have been registered in the last one month alone. "Despite the claims of vigorous awareness campaigns, the rising numbers tell a different story," a volunteer involved in anti-AIDS movement said.According to the district AIDS control authorities, 7,969 people were carrying the HIV virus. But sources said the numbers could be much more. "When compared to urban areas (0.5 per cent), the HIV-prevalence rate is high (3 per cent) among rural people," an official said.A volunteer working in a HIV/AIDS prevention project hit the nail on the head when he said: "The virus is spreading rapidly only because of gays who generally do not like to use a condom. Armed with the court ruling, the gays even in the rural areas are coming out of the closet."The authorities' efforts have also gone waste as there are no takers for the `blue boxes', containing free condoms, in villages and towns. "People have very little knowledge about condom use," a worker in AIDS prevention organisation said.District AIDS Control Society head T Dinesh said despite preventive measures, the rise in HIV-positive cases is worrisome. "Around 150 to 180 people are diagnosed with the virus every month," he said, admitting that HIV prevalence is high in the rural areas.According to statistics, 1,081 people have been declared HIV-positive in the first six months among the 30,347 people who underwent the relevant tests. Sources said 1,893 HIV-positive cases were recorded last year. "It has been an upward trend for the last six years. Unless the government steps in and takes harsh measures, the district will soon outbeat Guntur which is in the forefront in HIV-positive cases," a senior official said.Representatives of voluntary organisations working on AIDS prevention projects said due to lack of adequate awareness about HIV and prevention methods, the people are not practising safe sex methods. A voluntary organisation head S Siddaiah said regular interaction with HIV-afflicted goes a long way in checking the spread of the disease."Apart from creating awareness on preventive methods, the government should make efforts to educate children on HIV/AIDS," he added.